This is a bright, sunny morning, March 30, and I
have the joy and honor of being in the breakfast
area just north of Moody with Dr. N.A. McNeil. I'm
going to chat with him about his memories as a
student and then as one of the dedicated members of
the A&M staff. Dr. McNeil, try your, say a sentence
or two and let's see your mics working. Now then, I
was born in Moody. Okay, wait a minute. That's
enough.
Dr. McNeil, give us an autobiography of your days
before you got to A&M. Where did you grow up and your
family and what all did you learn growing up and
that sort of thing? Well, My daddy was a dedicated
Republican because he was related very distantly
to General Sam Houston. And when Harding was
elected, daddy expected to get the post office
immediately. But it didn't happen that way. He
rented our farm. to a distant cousin of his, and we
moved into Moody after spending seven months as a
farm overseer for a large landowner. After we
moved to Moody, we still were not able to get into
the post office until the last month of 19 and 22. At
that time, as a 10, 12 year old boy, eight year old
boy, I started working in the post office. And
daddy would sort the mail into six stacks. And we
had two stacks for local customers. And I put up the
mail on the front part of the office while the
carriers came in and took care of their various
duties with the four stacks that he had prepared
for them. After I got through with working in the
post office with Daddy, I went to school. And for
six months, they had to pay tuition for me because I
was not quite old enough to go to school that year.
But after we Got into the, after the election and
while we were waiting for his appointment, I went
to school at a rural school west of Moody at Haunted
Hill. We had one teacher. And I suppose I started my
teaching career there. Because when I went to
Moody to school, I learned to read in the first
grade. And when I got to Haunted Hill, the boys that
was in the first grade with me had not been in school
but maybe six weeks because they didn't start
school till cotton picking was over. And the
teacher who said to me, look, you've already read
all of these books. You go over and listen to this
other first grade teacher. first grade student as
he learns to read.
After I got back into the Moody School, I was
interested at age 10 in 4-H club work. And it was
several years after we got into 4-H club work
before we got a vocational agriculture teacher at
Moody. But I took part in that activity.
Sometime in the early fall of 1930,
one of my cousins came to me and said, look, you've
just been in high school three years, but you've
got as many credits in high school as I have. Let's
go to A&M together next year. We'd been in 4-H
together. So I said, well, all right. And we went
down to A&M in April to the judging contest. We were
dairy cattle judges, and we didn't place in the
contest down there. But I went to the poultry farm
and made application for a job. And soon after I got
home, I was told that I could work on the poultry
farm. In the meantime, I went down there and went to
work on the poultry farm, but this cousin of mine
could not finance in any way his going to A&M. He
didn't have a job, and so he worked for Daddy in the
post office for one year to get funds to go to A&M
with me the next year. And Elsie and I went to A&M as
part of the first project house that was ever
organized at Texas A&M. Now, this was the fall of?
31. No, fall of 32.
In the meantime, there's other boys from Moody who
wanted to go to A&M. And I came home and suggested
that if we wanted to go to A&M that we organize a
group and go down to A&M and get permission to have a
group from Moody who lived off of the campus. And we
went to see the Deans. And Dean Kyle was
immediately in favor of the project for the boys to
bring food from home and rent a house and live
together. And Dean Winkler, who at that time was
dean of the College of Education, knew my father
through the association of being postmaster at
Moody and his family there. So he said, look, this
is great, we'll do it. When we went to see the other
two deans, Dean Friley, and I don't instantly
recall, I don't know the name of the other deans, We
went to see Dean Francis. Of course, he was
completely deaf at that time. And Dean Francis
threw up his hands and says, whatever the rest of
them decide, I'll go along with them. Thank you for
coming. Two or three days later, we got a letter
from Texas A&M addressed to my daddy saying that
under two conditions, that you can do what you have
asked to do. You must have someone to cook for you.
You can't do that and come down here and batch. And
the second condition was that you must have an A&M
sponsor. We have that requirement for everybody.
So Dan Russell, who made the talk, at moody the year
that year before we approached the idea was asked
to be the sponsor for the group and he was very
graciously accepted the responsibility and did a
great deal of work to get the house organized he
found the cheap old house out near the Hort Farm
that had been abandoned for 15 or 20 years. Horse
farm? Hort. Horticulture farm. Oh, horticulture
farm. He was called the Suber House. And it was
ideally
fitted to be a project house. There were four
bedrooms upstairs. two bread rooms downstairs.
They had a parlor, a kitchen, and a dining room. But
they didn't have any water. And of course, they
didn't have any bath facilities. So the parents of
the boys, after we went down there, went down to A&M
and replaced broken window lights, broken
whatever they needed. And a well was dug by the
landlord. And it was cased with pine casing. And
you can imagine what that water tasted like when we
had to make our meals with pine tasting water. But
we piped the water into the bathroom and into the
kitchen. And we lived in this house for 18 months.
The first house was very, the first year was very
successful. Who was the cook? Lena McMahon,
M-C-M-A-H-A-N. McMahon sometimes it's called.
Where did you all locate her? Well, she was a cousin
of both A.A. McNeil and Ethel Aiken. mothers that
went to A&M at the time that it was approved were on
the steering committee that went to A&M. And she
was a lovely person. And her husband came with her.
He was unemployed at the time. And the first year,
in August, when most of the students had gone home,
Mr. McMahon was killed. on the road down to the
horticulture farm. He was changing a tire on a
truck and was killed. And after his death, then
Cousin Lena wouldn't stay with us. We had to get
someone else. And the next cook and caretaker was
unhappy at A&M and said on the first of, january
we're going back home to moody so that was the end
off and by that time other project houses had been
established and when those other houses were
established most of the group went into the lufkin
house and some of them went to the dormitory some of
them went to independent but they scattered and
the majority went to the lufkin house Do you
remember what you and others brought from home in
the way of food? We brought cured meat. We brought
canned goods, home canned goods. And mostly it was
canned, there was some canned meat that farmers
had, the brothers had canned meat. But it was, we
also purchased our necessary items from a local
chain store. And Dan Russell was instrumental in
locating this red and white store that gave us a
nice discount. And we bought all of the necessary
things other than that which we brought from home.
One boy brought a cow. Every boy brought four hens.
We had a chicken pen for all the eggs we needed. And
we had all the milk that we needed from the cow that
we brought from Moody.
At the
end of June, that was the second, third year, my
third year in college.
I had to go to summer camp.
Cut it off just a minute. Complete. It's on now.
Okay. After I had finished my junior year at A&M, I
was able
to get a contract. And with a contract, In military
science, I got $31 a month. And after I got the $31 a
month, I had to go to San Antonio for junior.
Between my junior and senior year, I went to ROTC
camp in San Antonio. I went to Camp Bullies. And we
had to work from very early in the morning until
noon, and then they dismissed us. And most of the
A&M boys headed for San Antonio. And there were
only three or four of us that were there in the
afternoon because we didn't have any contacts and
we didn't have any money and we stayed there. But in
the meantime, I lost my contract if I did not take
English. So I went to Tarleton to get the only
school that I could find that offered English that
I needed. And I enrolled in Tarleton, and the
teacher in English was Pearl Mahan. And she saw
three new students in her class, and she said, Ms.
So-and-so, where did you take your English? And
the student said, I took it at North Texas State.
And Ms. Mahan said, what did you make? She said, I
made an A. She said, if you work real hard, you can
make a B here. And then she asked the second
student, where did you take your prior English?
And she said, I took it somewhere else. I don't
remember. And then she said, Mr. McNeil, where did
you take your prior English? And I said, Texas A&M.
She said, Mr. McNeil, didn't you know that this was
the hardest, that my English course was the
hardest in the state? And I said, Ms. Mahan, I
didn't know it till I got here. But anyway, she had a
peculiar system of grading. I never understood
it. I never questioned it. And I made a C, which
would transfer to A&M. And another rather
peculiar incident happened out there. Old Pop
Hale had been teaching for years, and Pop Hale
taught an education course, and so I enrolled in an
education course. And the first day of class, he
asked a question.
It took me maybe decades of years to remember what
question he asked. But the question he had to do
with the peculiar kind of monkey that was found on
the island of Madagascar. And when I answered that
correctly, because I'd been reading the National
Geographic, he called me Madagascar for the rest
of the term. And at the end of that class, he called
me in and said, I want you to grade my papers. And so
in that Six weeks I was there, I graded Pop Hale's
homework for him. I'd wait till the class was gone,
get it, and then have it graded and ready for him to
pass out the next day. Now this is at Tarleton? At
Tarleton. Did you by chance ever hear any
discussion of a former student of theirs named
Earl Rudder? Not at all. The first time I heard the
name Earl Rudder, had to do with wartime
experiences. I had my wartime experiences in a
different area than Earl Rudder had his. We'll get
to those in a minute. At A&M, as far as you can
remember, what did it cost for you to go to A&M? What
was the tuition and fees when you were a freshman?
Do you remember? $50. $50. For all? That was for a
semester. Right. And where did you acquire that
$50? Well, when my folks
had to move away from the farm, I had a small dairy
herd. And when we left the farm, I had to dispose of
the dairy cattle. And I sent a load of cattle to Fort
Worth. Eight head. And when I got the check, after I
had paid the travel expenses and so forth in Fort
Worth, I had $85. And I accumulated money from
other ways until I had enough money to meet my
expenses.
I had money saved. that I used from various
activities. Now to take the tape off, I want to tell
you something else.
Back to the project house. Describe the routine of
duties that you and the other young men had in that
project house. Who did what? Each pair of boys in
one room had to keep their room clean. they had no
other responsibility mrs mcmahan prepared the
food they put it on the table and she did or her
husband did the washing of the dishes in other
project houses students were sometimes required
to do part of the dishwashers and so forth, but not
in any that I ever lived in. Did you all have any
responsibilities for mowing the grass? Well, yes
we did. One
incident that we had, we had no sewer system. We
built a privy with a deep hole out there and one
morning when it got real cold, we looked out and
there was smoke coming out of the privy. And sure
enough, Mrs. McMahon's husband was out there with
a bucket of cold to keep himself morning while he
did his morning's morning. And one time, the rest
of the boys got so annoyed with a couple of the boys
that they were not keeping their room like it ought
to be and so they each got little sticks and they
went in that room and completely dismantled
everything going around with their sticks saying
i'm killing rats we're killing rats in this room
and they didn't have any trouble with those fellas
not keeping their room clean after that how did you
all do your laundry uh we bundled all of our laundry
up and took it down the road to a black woman who did
the group the group laundry for everybody and it
cost us maybe uh 50 cents a week to no more than 75
cents a week to get everybody's laundry done and
they it was a very satisfactory laundry situation
In terms of food, it canned goods and cured meat,
which would have been primarily pork? Yes, pork.
Sometimes there was some canned meat from a beef
animal. In some families, they'd kill a beef on the
farm, and they didn't have the frozen food
facilities then, so they'd can the meat that they
couldn't cure. What about dessert? I really
learned to do without dessert when we were in the
project house. Did anybody bring any syrup,
molasses, ribbon cane syrup from home? Not from
this area. And do you remember how much this lady
was paid as the
hostess $1 per day. $1 per day. Well, $1 per month.
Per boy? Per boy. And there were how many? There
were 10 the first year and 12 the second. So you
lived there two years. And in relation to the
campus today, where was that house? The first
house was right across the street from the
horticulture farm. All right, but now. On the F&B
Road. The Wellborn Road? No, it was the road that
was going towards Snook? No, it was the road that
went out by the dairy farm. and the horticulture
farm, and it was called F&B Road. It was about a mile
to the railroad crossing and another mile from the
railroad crossing to the house. How did you and
your buddies get from the house to the campus for
class? Part of the time, we'd ride the truck that
Mr. Mahan had. It was a big old gravel truck, and
we'd ride in the back of that. Most of the time we'd
walk up the railroad track and highway. Very
seldom did we have to walk all of the way to A&M. At
night, well, describe a typical weekday. What
time did y'all get up? When did you go to class?
What'd you do for fun? Well, we generally had
breakfast at six o'clock in the morning. And then
that gave us two hours to get to an 8 o'clock class if
we had to walk all the way, but we didn't. We seldom
walked all the way. And at noon, we were able to get
back for a noon meal and our evening meal. We did not
eat any meals away from there.
We had football games and various other
activities. that is confined to the 10 or 12 of us
that were there. Now you were in the Corps. I was in
the Corps and hated every day of it. All right, did
you have to be over there to fall in for? The only
time I went to the Corps was on drill day. They lined
the day dodgers up on the second floor. And they
beat the hell out of us. My tail end was as black as
your hat. What did they use for paddles? It looked
like shaved down baseball bats. It'd be as big
around as a baseball bat, but it had flat ends. And
what outfit were you in? I was in F company
infantry. Did it have a nickname? Not that I know
of, but it was made up of some of the better students
at A&M that year. I remember that one of the Astons
was in that organization. One of the Astons, from
Brian? No. Who was that Aston? Oh, Jimmy Aston from
Dallas. That's right. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Farmersville. Right. And... Watson, the editor
of the battalion, was in that unit.
There were five of us that were seniors in F
Company. And, of course, I was a second lieutenant
because I hadn't been around all of the time. As far
as I know, I'm the only living person that was in my
senior class when I graduated.
The third year, see I stayed in project houses for
three years. Two years, because I'd stayed at the
poultry farm one year and then project house two
years. And then in the Corps, I waited on tables at
the mess hall. And I was the only senior that waited
on tables at A&M. Most of the supervisors were
juniors and been there for some time. She'll get
the phone.
Honey?
Now, you waited tables then in Sabisa? Right.
My mama
bought Lou Casey boots for me. Cost $35. And the
seniors in my company decided I had not earned
boots. And they were in my closet. And then they
weren't. And I had to go buy a pair of $4 or $5 lace-up
boots my senior year.
And that's just... Did the Lucchese boots ever
reappear? No. Oh, so somebody stole them. That's
right. Somebody stole them, but they meant for me
not to have senior boots as a day dodger. Now, were
all project house students considered day
dodgers? Until A&M built the 12 project houses,
they were. When were those built? Was it after you
were? It was about 1937. So after you were gone as a
student. About how many project houses were there
before A&M built some? At least 40. Did you all call
them project houses then? Yes, sir. Did you all
refer to your first one as the Moody Project House?
We talked about it, but we also said Dr. Russell,
D.R. Russell, said, had helped us, we put up a big
sign, Russell Hall. Describe him and personality
and type and everything. Well, Dr. Russell was a
very compassionate man. And he did
just a fantastic work with all of the project
houses. but it was the Moody group that drew him
into this. And the year that I was married in 1939,
the radio
program that was called the Inside Story
called him when much publicity had been given to a
Reader's Digest article saying that 2,000
people, 2,000 students were going to school on the
co-op plan which originated at Texas A&M with
Daniel Russell. And he told them that he did not
originate the plan, that I was a vocational
agriculture teacher at Alvin, And he recommended
they get in touch with me. And I got permission from
the school board to go to Chicago. And I was told
that I would stay at the Palmer House. And I thought
that that was some little old side place.
And when I found out it was the biggest hotel in
Chicago, I went during the American Legion
Convention, and they were dropping water in bags
on people, and you couldn't get within four blocks
of the hotel, and I had to dodge water bags to get to
it. When I came home, I told them that we couldn't
get in World War II, and that was in 1939. because we
couldn't stand another crop of legionnaires.
Let's see, back to that first year. Describe how
you enrolled, signed up for your first classes
that freshman year. What did you take that
freshman year and why? Well, I took a regular
course
and I lived at the poultry farm. And after the
spring term, I won a dairy cattle judging for
freshmen. And I had been getting up before
breakfast every morning and scraping the
dropping boards from the houses and then going to
breakfast and coming home and going to school. And
I worked on the poultry farm to make my payment. I
decided that after I won the dairy judging contest
that I'd take dairy husbandry. And that forced me
to move from the poultry farm to some other
arrangement. And of course the project house
really was patterned on the house where the
students ate with the group of people eating at the
hort farm. And I think that the fact that it was
patterned on that made Dean Kyle enthusiastic
about it. All right, as that freshman year, so you
took math and English and whatever. Do you
remember some of those early teachers that were
important to you later in your life?
Well, sort of. but not my freshman year. I had an
English teacher by the name of Keyes, if I remember
correctly. Keyes, K-E-Y? K-E-Y-S. He had been an
instructor at Thorpe Springs Christian College.
And the most person who influenced me most at A&M
was A.D. Martin, a math instructor. And he was, he
was a member of the Church of Christ. And there was
no building. And he came every Sunday morning and
brought the Lord's Supper for a devotional in the
YMCA. And on Sunday morning, I knew that I'd have a
letter in the post office if I went to church. My
mama had a letter. in the post office every Sunday
morning. And I got acquainted with A.D. Martin.
About how many attended that Church of Christ
service? Well, probably 15 or 20. Were there other
church groups meeting in the YMCA at various
times? As far as I know, not. The Baptist Church had
buildings just off of the campus. And the first
year that Brother Martin was there, he went down to
Houston to explain the church work that he did with
students at A&M. And a woman by the name of Woodward
told him that she wanted to build a church at A&M.
and for him to get plans for a church. And when he got
the plans and took it to her, it was a plan for a
wooden building. And she said, that doesn't suit
me. I want a brick building. And she was the wife of a
wealthy oil man. And she says, I'll give you
$10,000 a year for the next so and so. And so That
building was built when I was a senior. So that was
the first? That was the first building for the
Church of Christ in College Station. That's
right. And finished your senior year? I was down
there quite often looking at the building. I
watched them put every brick in it almost, but I was
concerned. And I really, I don't know how to go
about this, But Brother Martin gave me the cards
for all of the people who said that they were
members of the Church of Christ. And I carried
those cards and made those contacts of all of them.
And I knew by the time I was a senior, I knew nearly
every one of the members of the Church of Christ.
Were there many members off campus or were almost
all of them students? There was only one person
that ever came to that before church building. One
of the employees, the USDA, would occasionally
come to that service. And the others were
students.
And he brought the message each Sunday. That's
right. And then he'd go back to Bryan and go to
church in Bryan. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Did you by chance
meet Mr. Cashin, who was the YMCA director? Oh,
yes. Describe him, please. Well, he was just a fine
individual, and he was compassionate, and he
would do anything that he could for a student. I
knew all of the people that worked at the YMCA for a
period of time, but I don't really have any comment
to make about him. I knew him quite well. Did you, in
those days when you were living in the project
houses, did you go into the A&M dormitories very
often? Only when they took me in there when I was a
freshman. I see. I did not go into, when I had drill,
I didn't go into the dormitories. The only time I
went into dormitories was to visit with members of
the church. What about some friendships that you
made during those early years that lasted
forever? Who were some special fellow Aggies,
special to you? Well, now then, the people that was
in that first project cast evidently were made up
of different background, and we've maintained
contact. And in 1992,
we had been out from A&M over these long periods of
years, and we had a reunion here at Moody. And nine
of the 18 who went to A&M in 1932, in the fall of 1932,
met here at Moody for a reunion. About how many of
the original group graduated?
Half of them? Two-thirds? Oh, nearly all of them. I
don't remember but one or two that didn't make it.
We had one student from Moody that went down there
and stayed a half a year nearly, and he couldn't
make it. But I don't remember anybody else
dropping out, and I don't remember anybody else
that didn't graduate. When you went to and from
Moody to College Station, how did you get there?
Highway did. Road with them. Describe some
memories you have of hitchhiking to and from A&M.
Well, I can remember waiting on a corner in Marlin
for 14 hours before a cotton truck came along
loaded with cotton, and the driver told me I could
sit on top of that cotton if I wanted to, and I did. In
the four years that I went to A&M, I went back to A&M
on rail no more than twice when the weather was,
almost too bad to get if it wouldn't be anybody on
the highway. Where could you catch that train? In
Maryland? No, I caught the train in Moody and went
to Milano, caught a change of trains there and went
to Valley Junction and changed trains there and
got to College Station. And I had two stops there.
changes in between. Do you remember how much that
cost? No, I don't have an idea. Did you ever have any
bad experiences hitchhiking?
I wouldn't call it bad experience, but I got in a car
one time that was loaded with rifles. all kinds of
artillery. And the people in it identified
themselves to me as Texas Rangers, and they were on
the route
looking for Bonnie and Clyde. And I didn't, I got a
ride and I was glad to do it, but the Texas Rangers
picked me up one time, I remember. Which way were
they headed? They were headed towards College
Station. They'd let me out at College Station. Did
you ever have any fun experience hitchhiking?
Interesting? Goofy? Well, at the end of my
freshman year, I hitchhiked all over Central
Texas, from Moody to Goldthwait to Hamilton to
back to moody and this spare country between the
half of gold weight and hamilton i'll tell you that
but i made it i had relatives living in mills county
in comanche county And when you hitchhiked, you
always wore your uniform. Yes, sir. Did not put up a
sign or anything like that. Just rode your thumb.
That's right.
When you were going to class, how did you and your
classmates, how did you all behave in A&M classes?
There wasn't any question we behaved. And I want
you to know that when I was an instructor at A&M, I
never had a student that was any problem in
conduct.
My class was streaked one time. I'm not gonna put
this on the tape, but I'll give you my memoir that
describes the incident. If you and your buddies
had some free time, uh... where you didn't have to
work or didn't have to study what did y'all do for
fun for to relax
i suspect we we there were two or three of us that
that on sunday afternoon would go down into the
woods and look for pecan trees and we found hickory
nut trees down there most of us Spent our
afternoons, well, visiting and so forth. I don't
remember it. Other than football, I don't
remember that we played anything. Any other game,
we played football quite a lot when the weather was
good. Did y'all go to the movie much? Not very
often. After walking to school and back, Every day
we didn't want to walk over there at night. Did you,
in Aggie lingo, did you all sack out in the
afternoon? Not really. We either were going to
school or working. All right. So you got up, ate
breakfast, went to class, came back to eat lunch.
Right. And then went back to the campus. Right. So
you went to and from the campus every, at least
twice a day. Right. And we didn't walk over to the
campus very often at night, I'll tell you that. Did
you study in your room? Yes, sir. Who had a radio in
those days? Nobody. And by the way, we studied by
Aladdin lamps. There was no electricity. What
kind of stove did she have? That's an interesting
story. We Russell found some old stoves that had
been used years before and stored somewhere. And
each room had a chimney in it. And we had wood stoves
in each room. And
sometime in the changeover from wood to coal down
at the electric plant, they had covered up a lot of
wood that had been there for years. And so we mined
that wood from the covered up place at the back of
the power plant. Did she cook on a wood stove,
though? Yes, she did. Oh, really? Yes, sir. Oh, my.
All right. Did life change for you as a sophomore?
Was it different?